HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: This
is the closest we will ever get
to repealing
and replacing Obamacare.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Republicans
win an early
victory for their health care
bill as it makes
its way through Capitol Hill.
We take a look at the politics
and the details
of the plan.
Also ahead: additional U.S.
troops deploy
to Syria to help in the fight to
retake the
ISIS-held city of Raqqa.
And the hippy doctor's rise to
scientific
fame -- one man's journey from
Woodstock to
eradicating smallpox in India
and beyond.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT, Epidemiologist:
We had to
visit every house in India every
month for
20 months.
We made two billion house calls.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The first
votes are in the
books on the Republican
replacement bill for
Obamacare.
The American Health Care Act
moved forward
today, after marathon markup
Sessions.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: For,
Republicans a day of
determination and willpower.
MAN: On this vote, the ayes are
23, the nos
are 16.
LISA DESJARDINS: Two House
committees worked
through the night to pass the
GOP health care
bill in party-line votes.
Ways and Means, focused on tax
issues, finished
just before dawn.
Chairman Kevin Brady of Texas:
REP.
KEVIN BRADY (R), Texas: An
important step
in the repeal of Obamacare and
freeing millions
of Americans, patients and local
business
from that pain.
LISA DESJARDINS: The House
Energy and Commerce
Committee, which looked at
coverage issues,
went 27 hours straight.
MAN: This committee stands
adjourned.
(APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: The long hours
brought pizza
and coffee deliveries and,
especially overnight,
a straightforward debate about
government's
role in things like the Medicaid
program for
the poor.
REP.
KATHY CASTOR (D), Florida: We do
not know
the precise impact on working
families.
It is not clear.
But make no mistake, this
destroys Medicaid
as we know it.
It is the fundamental reworking
of that vital
federal-state partnership.
REP.
JOE BARTON (R), Texas: We
believe that if
we eliminate some of the
mandates in the Affordable
Care Act, give the states
flexibility to run
their Medicaid programs, that,
by golly, they
will figure out how to provide
the best health
care they can for their
populations.
LISA DESJARDINS: While
committees worked on
details, party leaders aimed for
the big picture.
The top Democrat in the House,
Nancy Pelosi,
decried the lack of analysis yet
by the nonpartisan
Congressional Budget Office.
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
Republicans are facing racing
this bill forward
before the CBO can truly expose
the consequences,
the catastrophic consequences of
their health
bill.
LISA DESJARDINS: Speaker Paul
Ryan, meanwhile,
rolled up his sleeves with a
PowerPoint presentation
for the press and strong words
for unsure
Republicans.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: This
is the closest we will ever get
to repealing
and replacing Obamacare.
The time is here, the time is
now, this is
the moment.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Republican
sales pitch
has an aggressive goal: to get
this bill through
Congress in one month, by April
7.
That's when lawmakers leave for
Easter recess,
hence the pace, with two House
committees
voting on two halves today and
next week the
Budget Committee planning to
merge those bills
into one.
To stay on track, the full House
would vote
by March 30.
That leaves just a week or two
for the Senate,
where a number of key
Republicans are already
raising objections.
This morning, Arkansas Senator
Tom cotton
tweeted: "House health care bill
can't pass
Senate without major changes.
Pause, start over.
Get it right, don't get it
fast."
Maine's Susan Collins told Yahoo
News yesterday:
"I do not think it would be
well-received
in the Senate."
And in a letter earlier this
week, four other
Republican senators, Rob Portman
of Ohio,
Shelley Moore Capito of West
Virginia, Cory
Gardner of Colorado and Lisa
Murkowski of
Alaska, said they are concerned
about Medicaid.
Conservatives like Rand Paul of
Kentucky,
Ted Cruz of Texas and Mike Lee
of Utah have
also spoken out against the
bill.
Enter President Trump, who
tweeted today:
"Despite what you hear in the
press, health
care is coming along great."
The White House is also moving
fast to campaign
for the bill on the ground.
Mr. Trump will hold a rally in
Nashville next
week, and Vice President Pence
heads to Louisville,
Kentucky, this weekend.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news,
President Trump's revised travel
ban faced
its first challenge in federal
court.
Hawaii filed suit last night,
saying the order
will harm its Muslim population,
tourism and
foreign students.
Hawaii Attorney General Doug
Chin Spoke in
Honolulu today.
DOUG CHIN, Attorney General of
Hawaii: Replaced
it with a lot of neutral
language, but that's
not going to be enough, in our
arguments or
in our opinions, to be able to
erase a lot
of the past statements that were
made where
it was just referred to, in
their words, in
President Trump's words, as a
Muslim ban.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Washington
State led the
legal push to block the
president's first
travel ban order.
Today, the state attorney
general, Bob Ferguson,
said he will ask a federal judge
to apply
the same restraining order to
the revised
version.
Arrests for illegal crossings at
the Mexican
border are down 44 percent since
President
Trump took office.
The Homeland Security Department
reports that,
in February, about 23,500 people
were arrested
trying to cross the border
illegally.
That was down from 42,500
arrested at the
border in January.
Secretary John Kelly says it's
due to the
president's moves to crack down
on illegal
immigration.
The U.S. military has reviewed a
January raid
in Yemen that killed a Navy SEAL
and found
no failings of judgment or
decision-making.
That word today from Army
General Joseph Votel,
the top U.S. commander in the
Middle East.
He also told a Senate hearing
that investigators
believe four to 12 civilians
died in the raid.
At that same Senate hearing,
General Votel
warned it will take more
American troops to
win the 15-year war in
Afghanistan.
He said Afghan units need more
training and
support.
Just yesterday, Islamic State
attackers killed
at least 31 people at a hospital
in Kabul.
Today, survivors told of facing
terror.
MAN (through translator): It was
a nightmare
situation.
We couldn't believe it was this
kind of situation,
because those who were attacking
us had doctor's
uniforms on.
We were shocked when we saw
AK-47s in their
hands being fired.
They killed our patients in
their beds and
they killed our doctors.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Funerals were
held today
for some of the victims.
The Senate Foreign Relations
Committee narrowly
endorsed David Friedman today as
ambassador
to Israel.
He's a staunch supporter of
Jewish settlements,
with a history of inflammatory
attacks on
liberal Jewish groups and other
opponents.
The full Senate will now vote on
the nomination.
It's widely reported that Jon
Huntsman has
been offered the post of
ambassador to Russia.
He served as ambassador to China
under President
Obama.
Russia has rejected U.S. claims
that a new
missile violates a landmark
nuclear arms treaty.
A top U.S. general charged
Wednesday that
the land-based cruise missile is
meant to
threaten U.S. and NATO interests
in Europe.
In response, a spokesman for
President Vladimir
Putin said: "Russia has adhered
to and will
adhere to all its international
obligations."
WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange
says his
organization will help tech
firms defend against
CIA hacking tools.
WikiLeaks released a trove of
documents this
week about the CIA's ability to
breach smartphone
and TV encryption.
Today, in an online news
conference, Assange
accused the spy agency of
devastating incompetence
for letting the tools leak.
JULIAN ASSANGE, Founder,
WikiLeaks: The CIA
developed a giant arsenal, what
appears to
be the largest arsenal of
Trojans and viruses
in the world, and didn't secure
it, lost control
of it, and then appears to have
covered up
that fact.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Assange spoke
from Ecuador's
embassy in London.
He sought refuge there in 2012
after being
charged with rape in Sweden.
Meanwhile, President Trump met
this afternoon
with CIA Director Mike Pompeo.
The White House said Mr. Trump
thinks the
agency's systems need updating.
A blast of gale-force winds left
utility crews
scrambling today across parts of
the Great
Lakes region.
A million homes and other
buildings lost power
in Michigan overnight, the most
in the state's
history.
Gusts of more than 60 miles an
hour took down
power lines across the state.
The damage sparked a fire that
killed five
people in a Detroit apartment
building.
The storm also left more than
200,000 customers
in the dark in Western New York.
The state of Utah is ready to
put the nation's
toughest drunken driving law on
the books.
Lawmakers voted last night to
lower the legal
blood alcohol limit to 0.05
percent.
The limit in most states is 0.08
And on Wall Street, stocks
managed very slight
gains today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
was up two
points to close at 20858.
The Nasdaq rose a point, and the
S&P 500 added
nearly two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
more U.S.
troops land in Syria to help
take back the
city of Raqqa; how the GOP's
health care plan
could seriously impact Medicaid;
and much
more.
The coming battle for the ISIS
capital, Raqqa,
in Syria is beginning to take
shape; 400 additional
American troops, Marines and
some Army Rangers
will join 500 U.S. special
operations troops
already on the ground, with an
array of Turkish
and rebel forces.
Russian and Syrian army troops
are also there.
The top American general for
Middle East operations,
General Joseph Votel, was on
Capitol Hill
today in the Senate Armed
Services Committee.
Chairman John McCain pushed him
on a particular
flash point: U.S. support for
Syrian Kurdish
forces, whom Turkey considers
terrorists.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona: I
think there's
a possibility of an impending
conflict between
Turkey and the Kurds, as opposed
to us all
working together to try to
defeat ISIS and
remove them from Raqqa.
Do you see that as a scenario
that we should
be concerned about?
GEN.
JOSEPH VOTEL, Commander, U.S.
Central Command:
I do, Mr. Chairman.
And to that end, we are trying
to take actions
to prevent that from occurring.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For more, I
spoke with Michael
Gordon, the chief military
correspondent for
The New York Times, who said
U.S. troops will
play a key role in the upcoming
battle.
MICHAEL GORDON, The New York
Times: If you
look at what we're doing in Iraq
right now,
and I have been there, the
United States is
providing artillery support,
along with the
French.
It's providing -- firing
surface-to-surface
rockets into Western Mosul.
It's providing air support.
And it's providing advisers.
And this is what has enabled the
Iraqi forces
to move forward in what is a
very difficult
fight.
Well, something very similar is
needed in
Syria in we want the Syrian
fighters to go
into a town that's defended by
3,000 to 4,000
ISIS militants.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You were just
there a couple
weeks ago, and there's lots of
different factions
here who at certain times are
working toward
a shared goal and other times
are working
toward their own ends.
It's a complicated situation.
Lay out the map for us a little
bit.
MICHAEL GORDON: The map is a bit
chaotic.
In Northern Syria, the Turkish
military has
intervened.
And along with Turkish-supported
opposition
forces, Syrian oppositions
forces, they have
taken the town of Al-Bab.
And, at times, the Turks have
threatened to
move on Manbij.
You also have hundreds of
American troops
there serving primarily as
advisers.
And they have helped train and
equip the security
forces in the town of Manbij.
And more recently, the Syrian
government and
the Russians have moved into
that area.
So it's a bit of a tinderbox
right now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Given all, who
goes in to
take Raqqa?
MICHAEL GORDON: Well, that's the
billion-dollar
question really.
What the Trump administration
has done so
far pretty much goes by the
Obama administration's
playbook.
I mean, their idea was the local
provide the
fighters, we provide the
firepower, and that's
how we grab back territory from
ISIS.
But the big question is, who are
going to
be the fighters who seize the
town?
And the most capable forces that
the American
military has found in the region
is this YPG
Kurdish militia.
They're the ones that have the
most experience
fighting.
They're the ones that played the
key role
in taking back Manbij.
They're the force that the
American military
is counting on to be a
component, not the
majority of the force, that
takes Raqqa, but
a key component of the assault
force.
The problem is, Turkey considers
them to be
terrorists, and they have sort
of drawn a
red line at arming the YPG.
But, unless we arm the YPG,
they're in no
position to help out in the
Raqqa assault.
And that's pretty much where
things stand
at this point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
best-case
scenario, this operation goes as
planned and
we recapture this particular
town or city.
Then what?
MICHAEL GORDON: Well, I mean,
there are a
couple things.
First, best case from the
American military's
standpoint is, they work with
the YPG, they
give them anti-tank weapons,
vehicles, machine
guns, heavy machine guns, the
Raqqa fight
goes forward.
That's going to be a long,
difficult fight,
just like Mosul is.
Then, once the capital of the
Islamic State
is retaken, a couple things
happen.
First, there has to be a
day-after plan for
who governs the city, who
provides essential
services, who is really going to
be in control
there.
It can't be the YPG.
Second, the war with ISIS isn't
over.
I mean, they have already begun
to move some
of their senior leadership to
Deir el-Zour.
They're in al-Qaim in Iraq.
They still have a shrunken
caliphate in parts
of Syria and Iraq.
And so that fight has to go on.
And, lastly, steps have to be
taken to avoid
a confrontation between the
Kurds and the
Turks, who are our NATO ally.
When I was in Syria with General
Votel, I
talked to the head of the Manbij
military
council, and I asked him, who is
your greatest
enemy, ISIS or the Turks?
He said that Turkey is the main
enemy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Michael Gordon
of The New York Times, thanks so
much.
MICHAEL GORDON: All right, thank
you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The WikiLeaks
release earlier
this week showed the CIA could
use hacking
tools to break into cell phones,
computers
and Internet-connected
televisions.
We should say there is no
evidence the CIA
used this against Americans.
But the revelations surprised
many.
It raises the concerns for the
increasing
number of Internet-connected
devices all around
us, and what they're monitoring
and who has
access to it.
In fact, in a recent murder
case, law enforcement
is trying to gather recordings
from an Amazon
Echo in order to see if it might
have picked
up evidence surrounding the
crime.
Brian Barrett covers these
issues for "Wired."
He joins me now.
Brian, let's separate the fact
from the fiction
a little bit here.
What have we learned from these
leaks?
What are these devices capable
of recording?
BRIAN BARRETT, "Wired": Well,
you know, it's
interesting.
What we learned from the leaks
is more of
a confirmation that the CIA is
hacking into
a lot of devices.
You would sort of expect that,
but what it
shows is that these devices can
be used in
ways that we might not have
expected.
So, a smart TV, for instance,
has a microphone
on it because sometimes remote
controls are
voice-activated now.
But the CIA has found a way to
use that to
listen to you.
Your smartphone, which the CIA
knows how to,
whether it's an iPhone or
Android phone, compromise,
those, too, the microphones can
listen to
you.
They can access the camera.
They can look through all of the
documents
that you have.
It's really full access to your
digital life.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Unlike the
Snowden revelations,
this isn't about mass
surveillance, bulk collection
of information.
This is in the targeted sense.
But there's kind of a violation
of a sense
of privacy here.
BRIAN BARRETT: Yes, well, I
think that's an
important distinction to make.
There is nothing in these leaks
to indicate
that the CIA is looking at
anyone that they
shouldn't be or that you
wouldn't expect them
to be.
What it does say is that there
are a lot more
vulnerabilities out there than
we may have
thought and that people other
than the CIA
may have access to them as well.
The CIA doesn't necessarily have
the only
access to, say, an IOS exploit
that allows
them to get into everybody's
iPhone, especially
when you consider that these
documents, according
to WikiLeaks and other reports,
have been
out for two months circulating
in sort of
the underground channels that
you would expect.
So, the real danger here isn't
necessarily
from the CIA.
It's that these tools exist and
that other
people may have access to them
and may be
using them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the fact
the government
didn't necessarily come clean
and tell the
tech companies that, hey, there
is this hole,
there's this backdoor, there's
this side door
that you can go through, does
that mean that
essentially since the
vulnerabilities were
discovered until now or until
whenever these
tech companies are made aware of
it, that
we have kind of been at greater
risk?
BRIAN BARRETT: Well, you know, I
want to be
cautious there, because we don't
know for
sure if the CIA talked to tech
companies or
not.
The companies themselves,
understandably,
don't want to talk a lot about
it.
The CIA is very quiet about it.
But I think that's true, and
especially when
you consider there is a
framework that has
been in place for a few years
developed by
the Obama White House where
intelligence agencies
agreed in certain circumstances
to give up
these so-called zero day
patches, if they
are not as useful as they need.
So, this indicates that there
are hundreds
of these vulnerabilities that
both the CIA
uses, presumably the NSA --
presumably, the
FBI has their own as well --
that are not
being disclosed.
And that lack of disclosure,
yes, does mean
that people could be at risk at
large.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This isn't
necessarily the
privacy vs. security false
dichotomy, but
there seems to be some privacy
that we exchange
for convenience, when we get
objects in our
home, whether it's a smart TV or
one of these
Amazon Echo or Google Home
devices that's
perpetually on and just waiting
for us to
say something.
I guess we trade in the fact
that there is
something listening to us if
it's waiting
for us to say something.
BRIAN BARRETT: That's true.
And I think that's more evident
than ever
before, especially as we start
to connect
more and more devices to the
Internet.
There is nothing in the CIA
leaks to indicate
that they had any access to an
Amazon Echo
or a Google Home, for instance,
but these
are devices that have
microphones on them
and listen to you.
The Internet of Things, almost
everything
has some sort of Internet
connection, which
isn't to say that your
dishwasher, Internet-connected
dishwasher, is going to be
spying on you,
but maybe it gets enlisted in a
botnet.
I think the most important
takeaway is for
people at home realizing that
every time you
let one of these devices into
your house,
you're creating a new entry
point potentially
for hackers.
That's not to be alarmist.
And I think it is, as you said,
a trade-off,
one that most people are happy
with and one
that most people won't run into
a problem
with, but it is something to be
mindful of.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Brian Barrett
of "Wired," thanks so much.
BRIAN BARRETT: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The House
Republican plan
moved a step forward today, but
big concerns
remain.
In a moment, William Brangham
talks to the
head of an insurance company.
But, first, Judy Woodruff zeros
in on some
of the basics about key changes
in the Republican
bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, we look
at Medicaid
and some big changes that could
be in store
under the Republican plan.
Under the Affordable Care Act,
more than 10
million more people got coverage
in 31 states
that expanded their Medicaid
program.
The GOP approach would
eventually change that
and more.
For now, the federal government
would continue
paying for those already added.
Starting in 2020, however,
enrollment would
freeze, and states wouldn't get
additional
dollars for signing anyone up.
The Republican bill would also
cap how much
the federal government pays per
Medicaid enrollee.
That is a fundamental change.
Julie Rovner of Kaiser Health
News joins us
again.
Welcome back, Julie.
So, remind us briefly, how did
Medicaid work
under the Affordable Care Act?
How does it work now?
JULIE ROVNER, Kaiser Health
News: Well, Medicaid
has always been thought of as
the health insurance
program for the poor, but you
had to be more
than poor to get on Medicaid
prior to the
Affordable Care Act.
You had to be poor and a
pregnant woman or
child, poor and disabled, poor
and elderly.
If you were poor and none of
those things,
you were not eligible in many
states.
The Affordable Care Act changed
that.
It said that all you had to be
was poor, and
you could get Medicaid.
And originally it was a
requirement.
The Supreme Court struck that
down and made
it optional.
And, as you mentioned, 31 states
have expanded
Medicaid to basically allow
everyone who is
poor.
And that's under 138 percent of
poverty, about
$15,000 a year for an
individual.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, why is the
Republican leadership
changing this?
JULIE ROVNER: Well, the
Republican leadership,
the Republican Party has been
agitating to
really scale back Medicaid for
many, many
years, really starting in the
1980s under
President Reagan.
There have been many effort,
none of which
have come to fruition, to scale
back the basic
Medicaid program.
But, in particular, they don't
like the expansion,
which they say is for
able-bodied people,
and, in practice, not all of the
people on
the expansion are what you would
consider
able-bodied.
But the first thing they want to
do is get
rid of that expanded Medicaid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And they would
put a cap on
how much it is that they would
give people.
JULIE ROVNER: That's right.
Well, they would put a cap.
It's called a per capita cap.
Basically, they would cap
funding per enrollee.
This is a different kind of
change than had
been talked about before, which
would just
be a block grant, where they
would just basically
say to state , we're going to
give you a chunk
of money.
And a state says, well, what
happens if we
have a recession and more people
qualify?
So, this would at least make up
for the number
of people on the program, but it
would still
cap spending on what has been
since it was
created in 1965 an open-ended
entitlement
that's shared between the
federal government
and the states in terms of
funding.
Basically, what it would do over
time is make
states pay a larger and larger
share of their
Medicaid costs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's -- and
so we're
hearing from governors,
including Republican
governors, that they're
concerned about this.
JULIE ROVNER: That's right.
And while many Republican
governors took the
expanded Medicaid, we should
point out that
the federal government is
actually paying
a larger share of that expansion
than they're
paying for the traditional
Medicaid population.
And that's why the complicated
phase-out in
the Republican proposal.
But, eventually, the Republican
governors
see that they would not only
stop getting
the extra money.
They would probably get less
money than they
were getting before the
Affordable Care Act
for the Medicaid program.
And the Medicaid program is
either the largest
or second largest program in
virtually every
state's budget.
So we're talking about a lot of
dollars here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, a number of
these governors
are still -- still don't see eye
to eye with
the Republican leadership and
the White House.
JULIE ROVNER: That's right, and
a lot of senators
in those states are basically
coming out in
favor of their governors, saying
they're concerned
about this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Julie, this
gets to why some states would be
hurt more
than others under this plan.
JULIE ROVNER: That's right.
It would be complicated.
It's not just how many people
are on Medicaid.
It's how much Medicaid costs in
those states.
It's what it's based on.
This is the ultimate formula
fight, which
Congress is very familiar with,
and it's a
big piece of this legislation
that the Republicans
are trying the push.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we should
say this is
all based on what is in this
proposed legislation.
As you and I are talking, we
know all this
is subject to change.
But this is what we can talk
about at this
point.
JULIE ROVNER: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Julie Rovner,
Kaiser Health
News, we thank you.
JULIE ROVNER: Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's pick
up where
Judy and Julie Rovner left off
and hear from
an insurance executive whose
business is focused
on Medicaid patients and who is
concerned
about these potential changes.
Dr. Mario Molina is CEO of
Molina Healthcare,
which offers insurance through
the Obamacare
exchanges and contracts with the
government
for Medicaid.
It operates in 13 states.
Welcome.
MARIO MOLINA, CEO, Molina
Healthcare: Thank
you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, you just
heard the conversation
about the changes that are --
the proposed
changes to Medicaid.
And you obviously have a lot of
people under
your umbrella who receive
Medicaid.
What's your concern?
MARIO MOLINA: Well, I'm very
concerned about
the long-term funding of the
program.
One of the members of Congress
said yesterday,
if you have Medicaid today,
you're going to
have Medicaid tomorrow and
things are going
to be fine.
But that's only partially true,
because, beginning
in 2020, there are going to be
major cuts
to Medicaid, and people who have
gotten coverage
through the ACA may lose it.
And people that have had
coverage through
traditional Medicaid may lose it
as well.
As you heard, the two biggest
things in the
state budget are Medicaid and
education.
And so you're going to see
competition between
funding Medicaid and funding
education.
And so states are going to have
the make cuts
to one program or the other, or
they're going
to have to raise taxes.
But the burden for paying for
health care
for low-income people is being
shifted to
the states.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The GOP, for
years, not
just with regards to Obamacare,
has said that
Medicaid is too big, costs the
government
too much, costs the states too
much, and that
they have to control these
costs.
What is your response to that?
MARIO MOLINA: Well, you know,
the CBO has
looked at this.
And they have found that the
most cost-effective
way of covering low-income
people is actually
through Medicaid.
Medicaid accounts for 50 percent
of all births
in this country.
One-third of all the children
are covered
under Medicaid, and it pays for
half of long-term
care.
So it's a big program that
covers 72 million
people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You obviously,
I understand,
have some concerns about what
this means for
the Obamacare exchanges and for
the individual
marketplace as well.
What are your concerns in that
regard?
MARIO MOLINA: Well, right now,
we cover about
a million people under the
marketplace.
And these are people who are
working, but
their employers don't offer them
insurance.
And they're getting subsidies
that allow them
to purchase insurance.
And they are going to be
threatened.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Obviously,
there are a lot
of other larger insurance
companies, larger
than yours, who have expressed a
lot of concern
with the exchanges.
And what have you heard from
them about their
concerns?
MARIO MOLINA: Well, most of the
big insurance
companies have gotten out.
United is out.
Aetna is getting out, Humana,
Cigna.
So the major insurance companies
that you
traditionally think of as
employee -- take
care of employer-sponsored care
are really
not participating.
This is being left to smaller
insurers, those
that focus on Medicaid, and many
local companies
like not-for-profits or Blue
Cross or Blue
Shield plans.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I know you
have been on
the Hill and talking to a lot of
members of
Congress.
What do you tell them when
they're in the
midst of this debate right now?
What have you been saying to
them?
MARIO MOLINA: Well, you know, we
have been
trying to educate them about
what this is
going to mean for the average
American and
then the ripple effects through
the economy.
So, for example, there was a
study done by
the University of Michigan that
showed this
was going to put about $400
million into the
Michigan economy.
That's going to go away.
And it's going to have a ripple
effect.
Many smaller rural hospitals are
likely to
go out of business.
And so, even if you have private
insurance,
you have difficulty getting
access to care,
because your community hospitals
may be gone.
The E.R. is going to be crowded
with people
who were insured and now have no
place to
go.
So it's going to affect
everyone, regardless
of what type of insurance you
have.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right.
Dr. Mario Molina, thank you very
much.
MARIO MOLINA: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even as the
president is
working to pass the health care
law, there
are reports he would also like
to craft a
trillion-dollar infrastructure
plan this summer.
That leads to questions about
priorities and
the question of public
investment.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
takes a trip on the rails in a
second look
for his weekly series, Making
Sense.
ANNOUNCER: Attention, please,
this is the
last call.
PAUL SOLMAN: Mid-morning at New
York's Penn
Station.
Throngs rush to the 10:00 a.m.
Acela to Washington,
D.C. Ridership is up and these
highish-speed
trains are at or near capacity
as business
travelers chug up and down the
Northeast Corridor.
WOMAN: Amtrak conductor 2153 to
the heading.
All stations are cleared.
PAUL SOLMAN: But they're
hurrying up in an
America of slowed-down
productivity, the amount
of output per hour of work
rising at just
1.3 percent a year since 2007,
compared to
more than double that rate from
1947 to 1973.
One cause, America's crumbling
infrastructure,
like our passenger rail system,
some of which
dates to the Civil War, causing
delays that
hamstring the economy.
Wick Moorman worked his way to
the top of
the Norfolk Southern Freight
Railroad, before
retiring last year, returning to
work recently,
at a dollar a year, to steer and
revive Amtrak.
Riding the Acela back to New
York, he insisted
it's not just our railroads that
need work.
WICK MOORMAN, CEO, Amtrak: When
you look at
the state of our highway system
today, which
we all get out and drive on
every day, in
terms of congestion, in terms of
the surface
conditions, in terms of the fact
that we're
seeing that more and more
bridges have to
be closed to rehabilitate, it
has to be an
economic drag, right?
Highway congestion alone costs
this country
an enormous amount of
productivity.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, why aren't we
investing in
infrastructure of the kind that
made America
great in the '40s, '50s, '60s,
government
investments that hiked our
economy to unheard-of
heights of productivity?
So asks Yale's Jacob Hacker.
His answer?
JACOB HACKER, Yale University:
We have forgotten
the incredibly important role
that government
plays in our prosperity.
PAUL SOLMAN: And thus the term
"American Amnesia,"
Hacker's new book, subtitled
"How the War
on Government Led Us to Forget
What Made America
Prosper," because, in the 19th
and 20th centuries,
prosper, we did.
JACOB HACKER: We went from being
from a relatively
poor, relatively undereducated
and relatively
unhealthy society to being the
richest, the
most well-educated and the
healthiest society
that the world had ever seen.
After World War II, we see the
blossoming
of this really active investing
state that's
investing on both non-defense
and defense
technology and really sowing the
seeds for
the productivity revolution that
occurs during
this period.
PAUL SOLMAN: Government outlays
of land for
railroads, say, subsidies for
airports and
waterways that helped make the
country one
market, speed goods and labor
from coast to
coast.
Think of Republican President
Eisenhower's
interstate highway system.
JACOB HACKER: The estimates are
that it accounted
for something like a third of
productivity
growth in the U.S. economy in
the late 1950s,
and around a quarter in the
1960s.
PAUL SOLMAN: And what's true of
hard infrastructure
is true of what were once
America's greatest
soft productivity advantages:
health and education.
JACOB HACKER: If you look at
older Americans
in the United States, they're
the most educated
older citizens in the world.
But if you look at younger
Americans, we have
fallen to the high teens in
terms of college
completion rates.
So, in a new economy that's
based much more
on knowledge and technology,
we're not investing
adequately or correctly to get
kids through
college the way other countries
are.
PAUL SOLMAN: In short, claims
Hacker, we forgot
what made us great, and instead
adopted a
profound skepticism about
government.
JACOB HACKER: As we have seen
government become
weaker and lobbyists more
powerful, Americans
have also become less trusting
of governments.
PAUL SOLMAN: And yet, these
days, government
investments may actually be the
most productive
ones available.
JACOB HACKER: If you look at how
our economy
has suffered over the last 15 or
20 years,
it's in significant part because
we haven't
done the investments in research
and development
and infrastructure and other
public goods
that are necessary for our
growth.
And, unfortunately, we're going
to be feeling
that overhang for a long time to
come, because
it's the investments we made in
the 1950s
and '60s and '70s that result in
some of the
greatest technological
breakthroughs that
we enjoy today.
PAUL SOLMAN: Such as?
JACOB HACKER: The iPhone.
We have an iPhone here?
PAUL SOLMAN: I have got one.
JACOB HACKER: Every major
component of your
iPhone is as a result of public
investment
and development.
GPS, the memory processors,
touch-screen technology,
originated in public research
projects.
PAUL SOLMAN: As we neared New
York, the lack
of investment in passenger rail
was hard to
miss.
The Acela decelerated, cars on
I-95 whizzing
past us.
That prompted a question to
Amtrak's CEO:
Why had we slowed to a crawl?
WICK MOORMAN: Because there's a
New Jersey
transit train going into Penn
Station ahead
of us, and we have exactly two
tracks under
that river.
and we get this kind of
congestion all the
time.
PAUL SOLMAN: Moreover, those
rail tunnels,
now more than a century old,
were flooded
by Hurricane Sandy four years
ago.
WICK MOORMAN: And I think that
the day is
coming when this nation is just
going to be
forced to invest, if we want to,
you know,
maintain our place in the world.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
President-Elect: We are going to
fix our inner
cities and rebuild our highways,
bridges,
tunnels, airports, schools,
hospitals.
We're going to rebuild our
infrastructure,
which will become, by the way,
second to none.
PAUL SOLMAN: On election night,
president-elect
Donald Trump touted his plan for
rebuilding
America, $137 billion in federal
tax credits
to private investors who would
then be incentivized
to finance toll roads, toll
bridges or other
projects that generate their own
revenue,
unleashing a hoped-for trillion
dollars of
infrastructure investment over
10 years.
And, if it works, says Jacob
Hacker, a Democrat:
JACOB HACKER: He's the
Nixon-goes-to-China
of infrastructure spending.
But I also think he has a very
good chance
of putting through massive tax
cuts.
They're going to take away a lot
of the public
funds that we need to do that
kind of infrastructure
investment.
PAUL SOLMAN: Furthermore, some
private infrastructure
investments, like toll roads,
have failed
in recent years.
As for private investment in
Amtrak?
Well, says its new CEO:
WICK MOORMAN: I'm skeptical.
Where -- how do you -- you fund
private investment,
as you know, in the highways by
things like
tolls.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
WICK MOORMAN: Right?
Well, that's harder out here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Not going to have a
toll at Wilmington.
WICK MOORMAN: No.
I mean, every time the train
goes through
with an E-ZPass, and you kind of
click off
another one?
It's just -- it's harder for me
to see right
now.
PAUL SOLMAN: And you're a guy
who went to
Harvard Business School.
You're not talking as some kind
of left-wing
Democrat who's always for more
and more spending,
more and more taxes.
WICK MOORMAN: No, no, no.
I'm just a person who looks at
the country
and what needs to be done and
says, this is
what we do in the business
world.
We fix this.
Why can't you fix it?
PAUL SOLMAN: Good question, to
which we will
all be waiting for the answer.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
economics
correspondent Paul Solman,
reporting aboard
Amtrak 2168.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next: the
memoirs of a hippie,
physician and disease fighter.
Fred de Sam Lazaro reports, part
of our ongoing
series Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The shiny
red T-bird convertible
is a nod to its owner's Detroit
roots.
But it's in San Francisco that
he first made
a name for himself.
It was quite a name to begin
with.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT, Epidemiologist:
It's so arrogant
to have a name like Brilliant
that I put Sometimes
Brilliant and Sometimes Not So
Brilliant.
And that's what I sign.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The memoir
Larry Brilliant
is autographing chronicles a
life of unusual
journeys, a civil rights, an
anti-Vietnam
War activist, and hippie, who
helped eradicate
smallpox from the world.
Today, he's an adviser to
Silicon Valley philanthropists
who are helping him tackle other
major diseases.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT: In the last 30
years we've
had 30 pathogens, viruses jump
from animals
to humans.
We know some of them, SARS,
MERS, swine flu,
bird flu, Ebola, Zika.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It all began
in 1969 in
San Francisco, where Brilliant
had come for
an internship after medical
school and volunteered
to work at the recently closed
federal prison
on Alcatraz Island, which was
occupied by
a group of about 100 Native
American protesters.
That stint got him on the
evening news.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT: Somebody from
Warner Brothers
saw me on television, and they
called me the
next day and they said, we're
starting a movie
in two or three days.
We're going to be gathering at
the same place
I got off the boat, and it's
going to be a
movie about hippies and rock 'n'
roll.
It's going to have the Grateful
Dead and the
Jefferson Airplane and Pink
Floyd.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He joined
the crew as
a doctor, the film was a flop,
but Brilliant
became friends with some of the
era's iconic
figures.
MAN: What we have in mind is
breakfast in
bed for 400,000.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They
included the Woodstock
emcee who became famous in clown
costume as
Wavy Gravy.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT: This is Wavy
Gravy.
MAN: I am so honored to meet
you.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: At 80, he's
slowed only
physically.
The friends still gather often
and recount
their adventures, including a
journey across
Europe toward India.
They had planned to feed flood
victims in
what was then East Pakistan, now
Bangladesh.
WAVY GRAVY, Entertainer: And the
idea was
that we had so much media from
doing the free
kitchen at Woodstock, that if we
got there
and started feeding people, that
it would
embarrass the government: My
God, there's
hippies doing it.
We better do it better!
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: For Larry
Brilliant and
his wife, Girija, this was a
transformative
journey.
They became disciples of a
spiritual leader
or guru, Neem Karoli Baba.
Were you able to converse with
him in Hindi?
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Hindi was a
big asset
for the assignment the guru gave
him: to help
eradicate small pox in India and
Bangladesh,
which were among last holdouts
for the virus
that had killed half-a-billion
people through
history.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT: Bad disease.
Most people thought it could
never be eradicated.
We had had a vaccine for 200
years, and what
we were doing is we were
vaccinating everybody.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That
strategy worked in
the West and developed
countries, but could
never work in India, he says,
with a population
then of 600 million people, some
20 million
of whom were on a bus or train
on any given
day.
The hippie doctor coaxed his way
into the
World Health Organization team
that took a
different approach: tracking
down every single
infected person and vaccinating
everyone around
them, creating a so-called ring
of immunity,
so the virus couldn't spread.
It was a Herculean task.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT: We had to visit
every house
in India every month for 20
months.
We made two billion house calls,
150,000 people,
doctors from 170 countries.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Smallpox
became the first
disease ever eradicated from the
planet.
Brilliant went on to become a
leading expert
on infectious disease, a
consultant to the
White House most recently when
Ebola threatened
to escalate.
MAN: What is it going to take to
prevent an
outbreak?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Today, Larry
Brilliant
heads a group called the Skoll
Global Threats
Fund, which focuses on issues
like climate
change, nuclear proliferation,
and pandemics.
It is an affiliate of the Skoll
Foundation,
which also helps fund the
"NewsHour."
MAN: It's about detect and
report.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: These
epidemiologists
are setting up pilot studies to
gather data
in 28 countries, trying to
determine early
patterns of how a disease breaks
out.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT: Wouldn't you
like to create
advisory panels and partnerships
with tech
companies, major universities,
epi departments?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Brilliant
has raised millions
of philanthropic dollars for
other efforts
that include the Seva
Foundation, an eye care
charity now in several countries
that he started
with Wavy Gravy.
After the smallpox campaign,
Larry Brilliant
began forging ties in Silicon
Valley, where
he's been a kind of guru to many
tech industry
leaders, including the late
Apple founder,
Steve Jobs.
The two men met in the '70s here
in India,
where both had come seeking
spiritual harbor.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT: We have Shiva
and Krishna
to welcome you.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
Brilliants' California
home is replete with symbols
that reflect
an embrace of all major
religions.
DR.
LARRY BRILLIANT: When I was with
Neem Karoli
Baba, he would always say sab
ek, all one.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That was the
spirit of
the '60s and '70s, he writes,
when beautiful
flowers blossomed alongside
vicious weeds,
an era that was neither all
Martin Luther
King nor all Charles Manson.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro, in Mill Valley,
California.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fred's
reporting is part
of the Under-Told Stories
Project at the University
of St. Thomas in Minnesota.
And we will be back shortly with
thoughts
from a woman who tackled family
health care
challenges by writing a book.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to another
in our Brief
But Spectacular series.
Tonight, we hear from Kelly
Corrigan, a New
York Times bestselling author
and the host
of the podcast "Exactly."
Corrigan talks about how her
family's health
struggles inspired her work.
KELLY CORRIGAN, Author: I do, do
a word a
day, and I love it.
My word of the day the other day
on my e-mail
was ripsnorter, that, like, a
party could
be a real ripsnorter.
And that's mine forever now,
because I'm going
to use that one.
My father was easily impressed
by everyone.
He sort of gave me the
impression that the
world was rooting for me.
He always used to say, "Ah,
lovey, you're
going to write the great
American novel someday."
And I thought, boy, that would
be the thrill
of a lifetime to hand him a book
that I wrote.
I was 36 with two kids in
diapers, and I had
discovered a pretty big tumor in
my breast.
And so I went over to my
friend's house who
is an OB-GYN.
And I took my shirt off on her
sofa in front
of my daughters, who were 1 and
2.
And she kind of felt me up on
the sofa.
And she said, "You got to go --
you got to
go have it looked at tomorrow."
The doctor said, "I am very
concerned."
And then I said, "Why are you
concerned?"
And he said, "Because it looks
like an explosion."
Talk about words.
Like, really?
You want to say explosion to a
36-years-old
who is, like, holding back
tears?
That's not
a good choice, Doctor.
And so I started chemotherapy
right away.
And then, while I was in
chemotherapy, my
father was diagnosed with
cancer.
His was more complex because of
his age and
because of some previous health
issues.
And so we were really told to
have a great year, and not to
have -- quote,
unquote -- "outrageous
expectations" for more.
I was in a panic, and I sort of
sent that
panicked energy on writing.
I just felt like you can't
possibly let this
man die without telling him,
with sufficient
emphasis, what it has been to be
his kid.
If I were to try to say to him,
God, you're
a great dad or you're, like, the
foundation
of my life, he would say, "Oh,
lovey, lovey,
lovey," and he would switch it
back to me.
So, it really had to be a book,
because I
had to have uninterrupted space
on the page
to say, no, this
is going to take more than a
minute.
This is going to take 300 pages.
There is no quantifying how
thrilling it was
to go on that ride with my dad.
I mean, he came to readings.
He signed books with me.
He shook hands with people.
It was the absolute dream come
true of all
dreams.
If nothing ever good ever
happens to me again,
I got more than I needed.
If nothing ever good ever
happens to me again,
I got more than I needed.
My name is Kelly Corrigan, and
this
is
my Brief But Spectacular take on
the power
of words.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can watch
additional
episodes of our Brief But
Spectacular series
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
A quick news update before we go
tonight.
Late today, the State Department
said in a
letter that Secretary of State
Rex Tillerson
has recused himself from issues
related to
the Keystone XL oil pipeline.
Tillerson is a former chief
executive of ExxonMobil.
And the Office of Government
Ethics is concerned
by the Trump administration's
refusal to discipline
Kellyanne Conway for promoting
Ivanka Trump's
fashion line last month.
In a letter to the White House,
the office's
director was critical of
Conway's -- quote
-- "misuse of position."
Federal rules prohibit executive
branch staffers
from endorsing products.
Finally, our own Gwen Ifill was
posthumously
awarded the John Chancellor
Award for Excellence
in Journalism by the Columbia
University Graduate
School of Journalism today.
Judy Woodruff spoke at the
event.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If she were alive
today, she'd
be leading the charge, reminding
us of all
the important stories out there
that we must
cover.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thank you, and
good night.